# Dialect

A chemical line notation that is backward-compatible with SMILES. For an introduction, see [the blog post](https://depth-first.com/articles/2021/09/22/beyond-smiles/). A [reference implementation](https://github.com/rapodaca/dialect.rs) is available on GitHub.

## Goals

The main goal of this manuscript is to define Dialect, a language that looks and works like SMILES-as-used. It seeks to specify the language in sufficient detail to implement readers, writers, and compliance suites. The result should be something that those in the field *want* to cite and build on because it saves them time and effort.

Compatibility, to the extent that it is possible, is paramount. This will mean that features that some might associate with SMILES will not be present in Dialect. However, no new features will be added. A SMILES reader should be very likely to parse the output of a Dialect writer. However, a Dialect reader may not be able to read output generated by a SMILES writer.

To accommodate future uses, guidelines and maybe a protocol for extensions will be given.

To ensure maximum compatibility of Dialect-branded readers and writers, certain aspects of implementation will be addressed.

## Non-Goals

- to prescribe any particular style of string
- to prescribe or require any form of canonicalization
- to maintain SMARTS or SMIRKS compatibility
- to maintain compatibility with any single SMILES implementation (e.g., Daylight Toolkit, OpenEye, or JChem).
- to specify any extensions whatsoever, except to exemplify ways in which extensions can be created
- to preserve any terminology or concepts used previously in the context of SMILES
- partial specification of any aspect of the language

## FAQ

- *Will Dialect support multi-center bonding?* No. Dialect is based on the valence bond (VB) model, which views a bond as a feature consisting of two atoms and an even electron count drawn equally from each atom. This simplification is key to Dialect's brevity. Any structure compatible with the VB model can be encoded and decoded through Dialect without information loss. Other structures can be encoded and decoded using more capable (and verbose) methods should they become available.

# Building the PDF

Install [Tex](https://www.latex-project.org/get/) and [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org).

On macOS, running Homebrew, this can be accomplished with:

```bash
brew install mactex # takes a long time
brew install pandoc
```

Build the PDF with:

```bash
bin/build.sh
```