Because it is based on SMILES, Dialect must adhere to certain questionable design choices made in the earlier language. The most noteworthy is partial parity bonds. The difficulties in working with PPBs have been noted in previous sections. The numerous opportunities for error when working with PPBs will no doubt serve as a rich source of software defects. 

Even so, certain common yet problematic SMILES features have been left out of Dialect. Some SMILES systems treat atoms bearing tellurium, selenium, and arsenic as selectable, but Dialect does not. The main reason is to keep the valence table small. Pruning requires that the element for every selectable atom be present in the valence table. These default valence must come from somewhere, but it is not clear where this should be. Furthermore, a large valence table unnecessarily implementors with little payoff. Heavy chalcogenides and pnictogens rarely need to be selected because when present in rings with unsaturation they inhibit DIME. Another feature supported by some SMILES implementations is non-tetrahedral atomic configuration. The complexity of these templates makes them very difficult to implement. Moreover, they are rarely used. Most importantly, they are incomplete. The so-called "aromatic bond" (`:`) has been omitted from Dialect, mainly because what documentation exists suggests that it does nothing. Extreme charges (beyond -9 or +9) are not supported because they are extremely rare and merely clutter the grammar while complicating implementations. Arbitrary element symbols are sometimes supported by SMILES implementations, but not by Dialect. Doing so complicates the task of implementing the readers and writers for minimal gain.

Choosing SMILES features to be included in Dialect raises the difficult question of defining SMILES itself. Unfortunately, this would appear to be an impossible task. The original SMILES paper omitted crucial topics such as atomic configuration and double bond conformation, and only incompletely discussed atom selection and its effects on implicit hydrogen count. There was no detailed discussion of grammar. Over the years, developers of SMILES readers and writers have addressed these shortcomings on an ad hoc basis and with little discussion in the wider cheminformatics community. To further complicate matters, many implementors have developed their own extensions, treating them as part of the language. The result is a plethora of dialects without a fully specified core.

Dialect attempts to solve this problem by fully specifying the largest possible subset of behaviors generally regarded as part of SMILES. Every string generated by a Dialect writer should be recognized as valid by modern SMILES readers. However, not every string generated by modern SMILES writers will be recognized as valid by a Dialect reader.

Beyond validity is the question of interpretation. Although Dialect's semantics have been described in full by this paper, the same can not be said for SMILES. Dialect deliberately omits some SMILES capabilities likely to be misinterpreted, but others remain due to their universal use. The largest source of semantic incompatibility is likely to be atom selection and its effect on implicit hydrogen counting. The detailed protocol presented in this paper is without parallel in the SMILES literature. The second most likely source of semantic incompatibility will likely be double bond conformation. Although this topic has been treated a length here, SMILES documentation on this topic is not as detailed &mdash; particularly with respect to implementation.
